Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
depth of anaesthesia monitoring. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is meant by depth of anaesthesia, and why do we monitor it?
Depth of anaesthesia refers to the degree of suppression of the central nervous
system produced by anaesthetic drugs,
in particular the degree of suppression of consciousness and of the responses to
stimulation, and we monitor it in order to ensure that anaesthesia is neither too
light, risking awareness, nor unnecessarily deep, with its attendant harms.
Anaesthesia is not a single state but a combination of components —
unconsciousness, amnesia, immobility and the suppression of the autonomic and
somatic responses to surgery — and the depth describes how profoundly the brain is
depressed.
We monitor depth for two opposing reasons.
The first is to prevent accidental awareness under general anaesthesia,
in which a patient who is intended to be unconscious becomes conscious during
surgery, sometimes with explicit recall and the risk of severe psychological harm,
a rare but serious complication particularly when neuromuscular block prevents the
movement that would otherwise signal light anaesthesia.
The second is to avoid unnecessarily deep anaesthesia,
which causes cardiovascular depression, delayed recovery, and has been associated,
in some studies, with postoperative delirium and possibly worse outcomes,
so that titrating to an adequate but not excessive depth is desirable.
Monitoring depth aims to guide the delivery of just sufficient anaesthesia for each
patient.
So depth of anaesthesia is the degree of anaesthetic-induced suppression of the
brain, particularly of consciousness and responsiveness;
we monitor it to prevent accidental awareness, especially in the paralysed patient,
and to avoid the harms of unnecessarily deep anaesthesia,
titrating to an adequate but not excessive depth for each individual.
What are the clinical signs of anaesthetic depth, and their limitations?
The traditional assessment of anaesthetic depth rests on clinical signs — the
physical and physiological responses of the patient — and although these remain
important, understanding their limitations explains why additional monitoring has
been sought.
Historically, the depth of anaesthesia was judged by a constellation of clinical
signs, classically described for ether anaesthesia in Guedel's stages and signs:
the pattern of respiration, the movements of the eyes and the eye reflexes,
the size and reactivity of the pupils, muscle tone and movement,
and the autonomic responses such as lacrimation, sweating, salivation,
heart rate and blood pressure.
In modern practice, the signs relied upon include movement or its absence in
response to stimulation, the haemodynamic responses of heart rate and blood
pressure to surgical stimulation, lacrimation and sweating, pupillary signs,
and respiratory pattern in the spontaneously breathing patient.
These signs have important limitations. They are indirect and non-specific:
heart rate and blood pressure are affected by many drugs and conditions unrelated
to depth, and are blunted by beta-blockers and other agents,
so they correlate poorly with the hypnotic state.
Movement, the most reassuring sign of light anaesthesia,
is abolished by neuromuscular blocking drugs,
removing the principal warning of awareness in the paralysed patient.
The autonomic signs may be present in an unconscious patient and absent in a
conscious one.
Thus clinical signs cannot reliably exclude awareness,
particularly under neuromuscular block.
So clinical signs of depth — respiration, eye signs, pupils, movement,
muscle tone and the autonomic responses of heart rate, blood pressure,
sweating and lacrimation — remain useful but are indirect,
non-specific and confounded by drugs; critically,
movement is abolished by neuromuscular block,
so clinical signs cannot reliably exclude awareness in the paralysed patient,
motivating other monitors.
What is accidental awareness, and what are its risk factors?
Accidental awareness under general anaesthesia is the unintended return or
persistence of consciousness during a procedure intended to be conducted under
general anaesthesia, sometimes with subsequent explicit recall,
and understanding it and its risk factors is central to depth monitoring,
because preventing it is a principal aim.
Awareness occurs when the delivered anaesthetic is insufficient to maintain
unconsciousness for the individual at that moment.
It may be with or without explicit recall; explicit awareness with recall,
particularly if accompanied by pain or the distress of paralysis with inability to
move or communicate, can cause severe and lasting psychological harm,
including post-traumatic stress disorder.
Its overall incidence is low but not negligible,
and higher in certain circumstances. The risk factors are several.
The use of neuromuscular blocking drugs is the most important,
since paralysis removes movement, the natural response to light anaesthesia,
and the great majority of awareness cases involve paralysis.
Light anaesthetic technique, as in the haemodynamically unstable patient — major
haemorrhage, cardiac surgery, caesarean section under general anaesthesia — where
the dose is deliberately limited, increases risk.
Difficulties at induction and during difficult airway management,
drug errors and equipment failures,
total intravenous anaesthesia with the potential for delivery failure,
and patient factors such as a previous awareness episode and certain drug
tolerances all increase risk.
So accidental awareness is unintended consciousness during intended general
anaesthesia, sometimes with distressing explicit recall and lasting psychological
harm; its principal risk factor is neuromuscular block, which removes movement,
together with deliberately light techniques in unstable patients,
difficult inductions, drug errors and equipment failures,
total intravenous anaesthesia, and certain patient factors.
On what physical principle do the electroencephalogram-based depth monitors work?
The electronic depth-of-anaesthesia monitors in common use are based on the
processed electroencephalogram, exploiting the changes in the electrical activity
of the cerebral cortex produced by anaesthetic drugs,
and understanding this principle explains both how they work and their limitations.
The electroencephalogram is the recording, from electrodes on the scalp,
of the small, spontaneous electrical potentials generated by the summated activity
of the cortical neurones; in the awake state it shows fast, low-amplitude,
desynchronised activity, and as anaesthesia deepens it changes characteristically —
slowing in frequency, increasing in amplitude, becoming more synchronised,
and at very deep levels showing burst suppression,
periods of electrical silence interrupting the activity,
progressing toward an isoelectric, flat trace.
These changes reflect the progressive depression of cortical activity by the
anaesthetic and correlate, in a general way,
with the depth of the hypnotic component of anaesthesia.
The depth monitors record the raw electroencephalogram from a small number of
frontal electrodes and process it by computer,
applying mathematical analysis — examining its frequency content, amplitude,
and other features, and the degree of burst suppression — to derive a single
processed index that summarises the state of the electroencephalogram and so,
it is intended, the depth of anaesthesia.
The principle is thus the quantification of the anaesthetic-induced changes in the
cortical electroencephalogram.
So the electroencephalogram-based depth monitors work by recording the spontaneous
cortical electrical activity, which changes characteristically with anaesthesia —
slowing, increasing in amplitude, and at depth showing burst suppression toward
isoelectricity — and processing it by computer to derive an index quantifying these
changes as a measure of the hypnotic depth of anaesthesia.
Describe how the processed electroencephalogram index is derived and displayed.
The derivation of a single processed electroencephalogram index from the complex
raw signal involves several stages of signal acquisition and mathematical analysis,
and understanding these explains what the displayed number represents and why it is
an empirical, statistically derived quantity.
First, the raw electroencephalogram is acquired from a small array of electrodes,
usually on the forehead, amplified,
and filtered to remove interference and artefact,
including the electromyographic activity of the forehead muscles and electrical
noise.
The cleaned signal is then analysed.
The frequency content is examined by Fourier analysis,
which decomposes the signal into its component frequencies and their powers,
the power spectrum; from this, parameters such as the spectral edge frequency — the
frequency below which most of the power lies — and the median frequency are
derived, both of which fall as anaesthesia deepens.
The amplitude and the proportion of time spent in burst suppression are measured.
Some monitors also use bispectral analysis,
examining the phase relationships between frequency components.
These parameters are combined, by a proprietary algorithm derived empirically from
studies correlating the electroencephalogram with clinical states,
into a single dimensionless index, typically scaled from zero to one hundred,
where one hundred represents fully awake and zero an isoelectric
electroencephalogram, with a target range for general anaesthesia conventionally
around forty to sixty.
The index is displayed as a number and trend,
often with the raw electroencephalogram and a measure of signal quality and
electromyographic activity.
So the processed index is derived by acquiring and filtering the frontal
electroencephalogram, analysing its frequency content by Fourier analysis to derive
parameters such as the spectral edge and median frequency,
measuring burst suppression and, in some, the phase relationships,
and combining these by an empirical algorithm into a dimensionless index from zero
to one hundred — awake at one hundred, isoelectric at zero,
with around forty to sixty targeted for anaesthesia.
What are the limitations of the processed electroencephalogram monitors?
The processed electroencephalogram monitors, while useful,
have important limitations that must be understood,
because over-reliance on the index, or failure to appreciate its weaknesses,
can lead to error, and these limitations explain why the index is a guide rather
than a definitive measure.
First, the index is an empirical, statistically derived number,
not a direct measure of consciousness,
and there is a delay between a change in the patient's state and the change in the
index, owing to the processing and averaging.
Second, the relationship between the index and the depth of anaesthesia is
agent-dependent: the index was largely validated for the
gamma-aminobutyric-acid-acting hypnotics such as propofol and the volatile agents,
and behaves differently or unreliably with other agents — ketamine and nitrous
oxide, which act differently, may not lower the index or may even raise it despite
anaesthesia, and dexmedetomidine and opioids have their own effects,
so the index can mislead with these drugs.
Third, the index is affected by artefact:
electromyographic activity from the forehead muscles can falsely raise it,
so that paralysis may lower the index independently of hypnotic depth,
and electrical interference, including from diathermy and other equipment,
disturbs it.
Fourth, individual variation and certain conditions — hypothermia, hypoglycaemia,
cerebral ischaemia and pre-existing neurological disease — alter the
electroencephalogram and the index independently of anaesthesia.
Fifth, cases of awareness have occurred despite an apparently adequate index.
So the processed electroencephalogram monitors are limited by being empirical,
delayed indices rather than direct measures; by their agent-dependence,
behaving unreliably with ketamine, nitrous oxide and others;
by susceptibility to electromyographic and electrical artefact;
by the influence of hypothermia, ischaemia and neurological disease;
and by reported awareness despite an adequate index — so the index guides but does
not guarantee.
What other monitors or signals are used to assess depth?
Besides the processed electroencephalogram,
several other signals and monitors are used or have been investigated to assess
anaesthetic depth, each reflecting a different component or correlate of the
anaesthetic state, and an awareness of these gives a fuller picture of depth
monitoring.
The end-tidal anaesthetic agent concentration is itself a valuable guide to depth
during inhalational anaesthesia: by maintaining the end-tidal concentration at an
adequate fraction of the age-adjusted minimum alveolar concentration,
typically at least zero point seven of the minimum alveolar concentration,
the anaesthetist can be reasonably assured against awareness,
and end-tidal agent monitoring with an alarm has been shown to reduce awareness,
providing an alternative or complement to the electroencephalogram for
volatile-based anaesthesia, though it does not apply to total intravenous
anaesthesia.
The autonomic and somatic responses — heart rate, blood pressure, sweating,
lacrimation and movement — reflect the response to surgical stimulation and the
analgesic and reflex-suppressing components,
and have been incorporated into monitors of the balance between stimulation and
anaesthesia.
The isolated forearm technique, in which a tourniquet excludes a relaxant from one
arm so the patient can move that hand to command,
directly tests responsiveness and has been used in research to detect awareness.
Evoked potentials, particularly the auditory evoked potentials,
change with depth and have been used. Pupillometry and measures of heart-rate
variability reflect autonomic state.
So besides the processed electroencephalogram,
depth is assessed by the end-tidal agent concentration as a fraction of the minimum
alveolar concentration, valuable for inhalational anaesthesia;
by the autonomic and somatic responses to stimulation;
by the isolated forearm technique testing responsiveness directly;
and by auditory evoked potentials and autonomic measures — each reflecting a
different facet of the anaesthetic state.
Explain burst suppression and its significance.
Burst suppression is a distinctive electroencephalographic pattern seen at deep
levels of anaesthesia, and understanding it is important because it is both a
marker of deep anaesthesia and, in excess,
a sign of unnecessarily or harmfully deep anaesthesia that the depth monitor
quantifies.
As anaesthesia deepens beyond the level needed for unconsciousness,
the electroencephalogram, having slowed and increased in amplitude,
begins to show burst suppression: the continuous activity is interrupted by periods
of electrical silence, so that the trace alternates between bursts of activity and
flat, suppressed intervals.
As anaesthesia deepens further, the suppressed periods lengthen and the bursts
shorten, until at very deep levels the electroencephalogram becomes isoelectric,
or flat, representing profound cortical depression.
The proportion of time spent in suppression is quantified by the depth monitors as
the burst-suppression ratio, and contributes to the index,
a very low index reflecting extensive suppression. The significance is twofold.
Burst suppression indicates a depth of anaesthesia considerably greater than that
required merely for unconsciousness,
so its presence usually signals unnecessarily deep anaesthesia,
which can be lightened; deep anaesthesia with prolonged burst suppression has been
associated in some studies with postoperative delirium and, in vulnerable patients,
possibly worse outcomes, so avoiding excessive suppression is part of titrating to
an adequate but not excessive depth.
Conversely, burst suppression is deliberately induced and monitored when profound
cerebral depression is wanted for cerebral protection.
So burst suppression is the alternation of electroencephalographic bursts with
periods of electrical silence at deep anaesthesia,
lengthening toward isoelectricity as depth increases,
quantified as the burst-suppression ratio;
it signals unnecessarily deep anaesthesia,
associated with delirium and possibly worse outcomes,
to be avoided unless deliberately induced for cerebral protection.
How is depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring used to prevent awareness in practice?
The practical use of depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring to prevent awareness depends
on understanding when and how it adds to standard care,
and the recommendations reflect the evidence about which patients benefit,
because monitoring is targeted rather than universal.
The foundation of preventing awareness is good anaesthetic technique:
ensuring adequate delivery of anaesthetic, checking equipment and drug delivery,
and, for inhalational anaesthesia, maintaining an adequate end-tidal agent
concentration with the alarm enabled,
which itself substantially guards against awareness.
Depth monitoring with the processed electroencephalogram is recommended
particularly in situations of higher risk where the usual safeguards are less
reliable: notably during total intravenous anaesthesia with neuromuscular block,
where there is no end-tidal agent concentration to monitor and paralysis removes
movement, so the electroencephalogram provides the main objective measure of
hypnotic depth; and in other high-risk circumstances such as deliberately light
anaesthesia in the unstable patient.
The monitor is used by maintaining the index within the target range,
conventionally forty to sixty, avoiding values that are too high,
which suggest light anaesthesia and risk of awareness,
while also avoiding excessively low values and burst suppression.
The index is interpreted alongside the clinical picture, the agent delivery,
and the other monitors, not in isolation,
and a rising index prompts a check of anaesthetic delivery.
So in practice awareness is prevented by good technique and,
for inhalational anaesthesia, adequate end-tidal agent with an alarm;
processed electroencephalogram monitoring is added particularly during total
intravenous anaesthesia with paralysis and in other high-risk situations,
maintaining the index in the target range of about forty to sixty and interpreting
it alongside the clinical picture and agent delivery rather than in isolation.
What is the evidence and controversy surrounding these monitors?
The evidence concerning depth-of-anaesthesia monitors,
and the controversy about their value, is worth understanding,
because it shapes the recommendations for their use and illustrates the difficulty
of measuring something as complex as the anaesthetic state.
The processed electroencephalogram monitors have been shown in randomised trials to
reduce the incidence of awareness compared with routine care that does not include
such monitoring or end-tidal agent alarms,
and to allow some reduction in anaesthetic dose and faster recovery.
However, the picture is nuanced and contested.
When the processed electroencephalogram was compared not with unmonitored care but
with the maintenance of an adequate end-tidal agent concentration with an alarm,
the electroencephalogram was not clearly superior for preventing awareness during
inhalational anaesthesia, suggesting that for volatile-based anaesthesia the agent
concentration is itself an effective guard,
while the electroencephalogram's particular value is in total intravenous
anaesthesia where no such agent measure exists.
Cases of awareness have occurred despite an apparently adequate index,
and the index has limitations and agent-dependence as discussed.
There is also debate about whether avoiding deep anaesthesia and burst suppression,
guided by the monitor, improves longer-term outcomes such as delirium and
mortality, with trials giving mixed results.
Thus the monitors are regarded as useful,
particularly in defined high-risk situations,
but not infallible and not a substitute for vigilance.
So the evidence shows the processed electroencephalogram reduces awareness compared
with unmonitored care and allows dose reduction,
but it is not clearly superior to an adequate end-tidal agent alarm for
inhalational anaesthesia, its main value being in total intravenous anaesthesia;
awareness can occur despite an adequate index,
and the benefit for longer-term outcomes is debated — so the monitors are useful in
high-risk situations but not infallible.
What are the sources of error and artefact in electroencephalogram-based monitoring?
Electroencephalogram-based depth monitoring is subject to several sources of error
and artefact that can cause the index to misrepresent the depth of anaesthesia,
and an awareness of these is necessary to interpret the index correctly and avoid
being misled.
The most important artefact is electromyographic contamination:
electrical activity from the frontal and facial muscles overlaps the
electroencephalogram and can falsely raise the index,
so that in a lightly paralysed or unparalysed patient the index may read higher
than the true hypnotic depth, and conversely the administration of a neuromuscular
blocking drug can cause the index to fall by removing this electromyographic
activity, independently of any change in hypnotic state — a fall that must not be
misinterpreted as deepening anaesthesia.
Electrical interference from diathermy, other monitors,
and equipment such as warming devices and pacemakers can disturb the signal and the
index.
Poor electrode contact and high impedance degrade the signal,
so good electrode application and a signal-quality indicator are important.
Patient factors alter the electroencephalogram independently of anaesthesia:
hypothermia, hypoglycaemia, cerebral hypoperfusion or ischaemia,
and pre-existing neurological disease,
dementia or epilepsy all change the trace and the index.
The agent-dependence already discussed means ketamine and nitrous oxide may not
lower, or may raise, the index. There is also a processing delay.
So electroencephalogram-based monitoring errors arise chiefly from
electromyographic contamination raising the index,
and from paralysis lowering it independently of hypnotic depth;
from diathermy and electrical interference; from poor electrode contact;
from hypothermia, ischaemia and neurological disease altering the trace;
from agent-dependence with ketamine and nitrous oxide;
and from the processing delay — all to be appreciated when interpreting the index.
Summarise the clinical applications of depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring.
Drawing the applications together, depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring is used to
titrate anaesthesia to an adequate but not excessive level,
with particular value in defined situations,
and summarising its uses shows how it is integrated into practice.
Its foremost application is the prevention of accidental awareness,
particularly in high-risk circumstances:
during total intravenous anaesthesia combined with neuromuscular block,
where the processed electroencephalogram provides the main objective measure of
hypnotic depth in the absence of an end-tidal agent concentration;
and in deliberately light anaesthesia in the haemodynamically unstable,
such as in major haemorrhage or cardiac surgery.
For inhalational anaesthesia, end-tidal agent monitoring as a fraction of the
minimum alveolar concentration, with an alarm,
serves the same purpose and may suffice.
A second application is the avoidance of unnecessarily deep anaesthesia:
by keeping the index in the target range and avoiding excessive burst suppression,
the anaesthetist titrates the dose to the individual,
reducing cardiovascular depression, speeding recovery,
and possibly reducing postoperative delirium in vulnerable patients,
particularly the elderly.
The monitor is also used to guide anaesthesia in the elderly and frail,
in whom anaesthetic requirements are reduced,
and in research into consciousness and the anaesthetic state.
Throughout, it is used as a guide alongside clinical judgement and the other
monitors.
So depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring is applied chiefly to prevent awareness in
high-risk situations — especially total intravenous anaesthesia with paralysis —
and to avoid unnecessarily deep anaesthesia,
titrating the dose to the individual to reduce cardiovascular depression,
speed recovery and possibly reduce delirium in the elderly,
used as a guide alongside end-tidal agent monitoring and clinical judgement.
Finally, draw the station together.
Drawing the station together, depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring seeks to measure the
degree of anaesthetic suppression of the brain,
in order to deliver anaesthesia that is adequate but not excessive — preventing
accidental awareness on the one hand and the harms of unnecessarily deep
anaesthesia on the other.
Clinical signs, the traditional guide, are indirect and non-specific and,
crucially, movement is abolished by neuromuscular block,
so they cannot reliably exclude awareness in the paralysed patient.
The processed electroencephalogram monitors quantify the characteristic changes the
anaesthetic produces in the cortical electrical activity — slowing,
increased amplitude, and burst suppression toward isoelectricity — deriving an
empirical index from zero to one hundred, with around forty to sixty targeted;
they reduce awareness compared with unmonitored care and are particularly valuable
during total intravenous anaesthesia with paralysis,
where no end-tidal agent concentration exists.
Their limitations — agent-dependence with ketamine and nitrous oxide,
electromyographic and electrical artefact,
the influence of hypothermia and ischaemia,
and reported awareness despite an adequate index — mean the index guides rather
than guarantees.
For inhalational anaesthesia, an adequate end-tidal agent concentration with an
alarm is itself an effective guard.
So depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring unites the processed electroencephalogram,
end-tidal agent concentration and clinical signs to titrate anaesthesia to the
individual, preventing awareness and excessive depth;
understood as a guide with real limitations and combined with vigilance,
it is a valuable contributor to safe and tailored anaesthesia,
a fitting close to this batch of physics stations.
What are the components of the anaesthetic state,
and can a single index capture them?
An important conceptual point underlying depth monitoring is that general
anaesthesia is not a single phenomenon but a combination of separately mediated
components, and appreciating this explains why no single number can fully capture
the depth of anaesthesia.
The anaesthetic state comprises several distinct components: unconsciousness,
the loss of awareness; amnesia, the loss of memory formation; immobility,
the absence of movement in response to noxious stimulation;
and the suppression of the autonomic and somatic reflex responses to surgery,
sometimes considered with analgesia.
These components are mediated at different sites and by different mechanisms:
unconsciousness and amnesia are predominantly cortical and subcortical,
cerebral phenomena; immobility in response to a noxious stimulus is mediated
largely at the level of the spinal cord, not the cortex;
and the autonomic responses involve brainstem and spinal pathways.
Different drugs affect these components to differing degrees,
and the components do not all deepen in parallel.
The consequence for monitoring is fundamental:
a processed electroencephalogram index,
derived from the cortical electrical activity,
reflects chiefly the hypnotic component — unconsciousness — and does not measure
immobility, which is spinal, nor analgesia, nor reliably the autonomic responses.
Thus a single index cannot represent the whole anaesthetic state;
it monitors one component, hypnosis,
and must be interpreted alongside measures of the others, such as movement,
the autonomic responses and the analgesic provision.
So the anaesthetic state comprises separately mediated components — unconsciousness
and amnesia, which are cerebral; immobility, which is spinal;
and autonomic and somatic reflex suppression — that do not deepen in parallel;
a processed electroencephalogram index reflects chiefly the cortical hypnotic
component and cannot capture immobility or analgesia,
so no single number represents the whole anaesthetic state.
Describe in more detail the changes in the raw electroencephalogram as anaesthesia
deepens.
A more detailed account of the sequence of changes in the raw electroencephalogram
as anaesthesia deepens is valuable,
because these changes are the substrate from which the processed index is derived
and because recognising them on the displayed raw trace aids interpretation.
In the awake, alert state with eyes open,
the electroencephalogram shows predominantly fast, low-amplitude,
desynchronised activity in the beta range, above about thirteen hertz.
As the patient relaxes and closes the eyes, slower alpha activity,
around eight to thirteen hertz, appears posteriorly.
With the induction of anaesthesia, there is often a brief,
paradoxical increase in fast beta activity — a transient activation or excitation —
before the trace slows.
As anaesthesia deepens to a surgical level,
the dominant frequency progressively slows and the amplitude increases:
theta activity, around four to eight hertz, and then large, slow delta activity,
below four hertz, come to dominate,
with increased synchronisation and a characteristic frontal pattern,
including in some agents prominent alpha activity over the front of the head.
As anaesthesia deepens further, beyond that needed for unconsciousness,
burst suppression appears: the activity is interrupted by periods of electrical
silence, which lengthen as depth increases.
At very deep levels the electroencephalogram becomes isoelectric,
a flat trace representing maximal cortical depression.
This general progression — fast and low to slow and large, then burst suppression,
then isoelectric — underlies the index,
though the precise pattern varies with the agent.
So as anaesthesia deepens the raw electroencephalogram progresses from awake fast
low-amplitude beta, through a brief paradoxical activation at induction,
to progressively slower and larger theta and delta activity with frontal
synchronisation at surgical depth, then to burst suppression with lengthening
silent periods, and finally to an isoelectric trace — the substrate from which the
processed index is derived, varying somewhat with the agent.
What is the minimum alveolar concentration, and how does it relate to depth?
The minimum alveolar concentration is a fundamental measure of the potency of
inhalational agents and a practical guide to one component of anaesthetic depth,
and clarifying what it measures and how it relates to the other indices is
important to avoid confusing it with a measure of hypnosis.
The minimum alveolar concentration of a volatile agent is defined as the alveolar
concentration, at equilibrium and at one atmosphere,
at which fifty per cent of subjects do not move in response to a standard surgical
skin incision.
Crucially, its endpoint is movement,
and the suppression of movement is mediated predominantly at the spinal cord;
the minimum alveolar concentration therefore measures the immobility component of
anaesthesia, not the hypnotic, cortical component.
The end-tidal agent concentration, expressed as a fraction of the age-adjusted
minimum alveolar concentration, is a valuable and continuously available guide to
depth during inhalational anaesthesia,
and maintaining it above an adequate fraction guards against awareness.
Related values quantify other endpoints:
the minimum alveolar concentration for blunting the adrenergic response to incision
is higher, while the concentration that abolishes appropriate response to command,
the minimum alveolar concentration awake, is lower,
around a third of the minimum alveolar concentration,
and corresponds more closely to loss of consciousness.
The minimum alveolar concentration falls with age, hypothermia,
opioids and other factors, requiring age adjustment.
Thus it complements, but is not equivalent to, the electroencephalographic index.
So the minimum alveolar concentration is the alveolar concentration preventing
movement to incision in half of subjects, an endpoint mediated at the spinal cord,
so it measures immobility rather than hypnosis;
the end-tidal fraction of the age-adjusted minimum alveolar concentration guides
depth and guards against awareness in inhalational anaesthesia,
while the lower minimum alveolar concentration awake corresponds to consciousness —
complementing but not equivalent to the electroencephalographic index.
Describe auditory evoked potentials as a measure of depth.
Auditory evoked potentials are an alternative electroencephalographic approach to
monitoring anaesthetic depth that differs fundamentally from the spontaneous
electroencephalogram, and understanding them illustrates a method that some
consider more closely related to the processing of information by the brain.
Whereas the processed electroencephalogram analyses the spontaneous,
ongoing cortical activity, the auditory evoked potential is the brain's electrical
response to a repeated auditory stimulus, such as a click delivered to the ear;
the small evoked response is extracted from the background electroencephalogram by
averaging many responses time-locked to the stimulus.
The response has several components reflecting successive stages of auditory
processing: the early brainstem response,
the middle-latency response generated by the primary auditory cortex,
and the later cortical responses.
The middle-latency auditory evoked potential is the component most useful for depth
monitoring, because it reflects the early cortical processing of the stimulus and
changes in a graded, progressive way as anaesthesia deepens:
the latencies of its waves lengthen and their amplitudes diminish with increasing
depth, and the response is progressively abolished as consciousness is lost.
This graded change, and the fact that it reflects the brain's actual processing of
a stimulus, have been argued to make it a good correlate of the transition from
consciousness to unconsciousness, and it has been incorporated into some depth
monitors as an index.
It may be less affected by some of the limitations of the spontaneous
electroencephalogram, though it has its own.
So the auditory evoked potential is the averaged electrical response of the brain
to repeated auditory clicks; its middle-latency component,
generated by the auditory cortex, changes in a graded way with depth,
its wave latencies lengthening and amplitudes diminishing as anaesthesia deepens
and consciousness is lost, making it a correlate of the transition to
unconsciousness that has been used as a depth index,
reflecting the brain's processing of a stimulus.
What is the entropy approach to processed electroencephalogram monitoring?
The entropy approach is a particular method of processing the electroencephalogram
to derive a depth index, based on a different mathematical principle from the
frequency analysis described earlier,
and understanding it illustrates the variety of processed indices and a
conceptually distinct way of quantifying the anaesthetic effect.
Entropy, in this context, is a measure of the irregularity,
disorder or unpredictability of a signal: a signal with much irregular,
complex content has high entropy, while a regular, ordered,
predictable signal has low entropy.
The basis of the entropy approach is the observation that the awake
electroencephalogram is highly irregular and complex, with high entropy,
whereas as anaesthesia deepens the electroencephalogram becomes more regular,
ordered and predictable, with lower entropy,
falling further as burst suppression and isoelectricity appear.
The monitor computes the entropy of the electroencephalogram signal and expresses
it as an index that falls with deepening anaesthesia.
A particular feature of the commercial entropy monitor is that it computes two
values over different frequency ranges: a state entropy,
derived from the lower-frequency range dominated by the electroencephalogram,
reflecting the cortical state; and a response entropy,
derived from a wider range including the higher frequencies that contain frontal
electromyographic activity, which responds rapidly and can indicate arousal or
inadequate analgesia through the return of muscle activity.
A divergence between the two can warn of impending arousal.
Thus entropy provides an index conceptually based on signal irregularity.
So the entropy approach quantifies the irregularity of the electroencephalogram,
which is high when awake and falls as anaesthesia deepens and the signal becomes
more ordered; the monitor derives a state entropy reflecting the cortical
electroencephalogram and a response entropy including frontal electromyographic
activity that responds rapidly to arousal,
their divergence warning of impending wakening — a processed index based on signal
disorder rather than frequency analysis alone.
How should depth monitoring be applied in the elderly and those at risk of delirium?
The application of depth-of-anaesthesia monitoring in the elderly and in those at
risk of postoperative delirium is a subject of particular interest and some
controversy, and considering it illustrates the use of depth monitoring not only to
prevent awareness but to avoid the harms of excessive depth in vulnerable patients.
The elderly have reduced anaesthetic requirements — the minimum alveolar
concentration falls with age, and the brain is more sensitive — so that a dose
appropriate for a younger patient may produce unnecessarily deep anaesthesia,
with prolonged burst suppression, in an older one;
age adjustment of the minimum alveolar concentration and depth monitoring help to
avoid this.
Postoperative delirium and cognitive dysfunction are common and serious in the
elderly, and excessive anaesthetic depth, particularly prolonged burst suppression,
has been associated in observational and some interventional studies with an
increased risk, raising the hypothesis that titrating anaesthesia to avoid
excessive depth, guided by the electroencephalogram, might reduce delirium.
The evidence is mixed: some trials suggested a reduction in delirium with
depth-guided lighter anaesthesia, while others, including large trials,
found no clear benefit on delirium or longer-term cognition,
so the matter remains unsettled.
Nonetheless, avoiding clearly excessive depth and prolonged burst suppression,
and titrating the dose to the individual reduced requirement,
is reasonable and may help.
The monitor is thus used in the elderly to tailor the dose and avoid excessive
depth, alongside good general care.
So in the elderly and those at risk of delirium,
depth monitoring helps avoid unnecessarily deep anaesthesia and prolonged burst
suppression, to which their reduced requirements predispose;
excessive depth has been associated with delirium,
and although trials of depth-guided anaesthesia to reduce delirium give mixed
results, titrating the dose to the individual and avoiding clearly excessive depth
is reasonable, used alongside good general care.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account,
and a fitting close to this batch. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Depth of anaesthesia is the degree of anaesthetic suppression of the brain
(consciousness, responsiveness); it is monitored to prevent accidental AWARENESS
(especially under neuromuscular block,
which removes movement - the natural sign of light anaesthesia) and to avoid
unnecessarily DEEP anaesthesia (cardiovascular depression, delayed recovery,
possible delirium).
Second, Clinical signs (respiration, eye signs, pupils, movement,
and autonomic responses - heart rate, blood pressure, sweating,
lacrimation) are indirect, non-specific and drug-confounded; crucially,
MOVEMENT is abolished by neuromuscular block,
so clinical signs cannot reliably exclude awareness in the paralysed patient.
Third, Processed EEG monitors quantify the anaesthetic-induced EEG changes
(slowing, increased amplitude, then BURST SUPPRESSION toward isoelectricity) via
Fourier/bispectral analysis into a dimensionless index 0-100 (100 awake,
0 isoelectric; ~40-60 targeted for anaesthesia);
burst suppression signals unnecessarily deep anaesthesia (associated with delirium)
unless deliberately induced for cerebral protection.
Fourth, Key limitations: the index is empirical and delayed,
AGENT-DEPENDENT (ketamine and nitrous oxide may not lower - or may raise - it),
corrupted by EMG artefact (paralysis lowers the index independently of hypnotic
depth; forehead muscle activity raises it) and electrical interference,
and altered by hypothermia, ischaemia and neurological disease;
awareness has occurred despite an adequate index.
Fifth, Processed EEG reduces awareness vs unmonitored care and is most valuable in
TIVA with paralysis (no end-tidal agent to monitor) and other
high-risk/light-anaesthesia situations; for INHALATIONAL anaesthesia,
maintaining an adequate end-tidal agent concentration (>=0.7 age-adjusted MAC) with
an alarm is itself an effective guard - the index guides alongside agent monitoring
and clinical judgement, not in isolation.
Thank you. That concludes the station.